# LearingPython
species can serve as electron acceptors in anaerobic respiration (e.g., NO32 and NO22) or as electron donors (e.g., NO22
and NH41) in chemolithotrophy. This can lead to some confusion, but the trick is to consider the oxidation state of the nitrogen species: is it fully oxidized (i.e., NO32)? If so, it can only
accept electrons. Conversely, if it is fully reduced (NH41), its
role is limited to electron donor. Nitrite (NO22) is neither fully
oxidized nor reduced, so it can function as either electron donor or acceptor.
 

nitrogen fixation—the reduction of the inorganic gaseous molecule N2 to its organic form (e.g., amino acids, purines, and pyrimidines). Nitrogen fixation is performed only by some bacteria and archaea. Although the nitrogenase enzyme is sensitive to oxygen, nitrogen fixation can be carried out under both oxic and anoxic conditions. Microbes such as Azotobacter spp. and cyanobacteria in the genus Trichodesmium fix nitrogen aerobically, while free-living anaerobes such as Clostridium spp. also fix nitrogen. Perhaps the best-studied nitrogen-fixing microbes are the bacterial symbionts of leguminous plants, including rhizobia, their a-proteobacterial relatives, and a few b-proteobacteria. Other bacterial symbionts fix nitrogen as well. For instance, actinomycete species in the genus Frankia fix nitrogen while colonizing many types of woody shrubs, and heterocyst-forming cyanobacteria Anabaena spp. fix nitrogen when in association with the water fern Azolla spp.

The product of N2 fixation is ammonia (NH3), which is immediately incorporated into organic matter as an amine. These amine N atoms are introduced into proteins, nucleic acids, and other biomolecules. Eventually these organic molecules are degraded (dissimilated) and mineralized, and the nitrogen is released as ammonium (NH41). Many microbial genera are capable of dissimilation of organic nitrogen substrates, but complete mineralization requires an assemblage of microbes.

In the first step, ammonium is oxidized to nitrite (NO22), and in the second step, NO22 is oxidized to nitrate (NO32). No single microbial genus can perform both steps of nitrification. For example, some mesophilic archaea and bacteria in the genera Nitrosomonas and Nitrosococcus play important roles in ammonia oxidation, while Nitrobacter spp. and related bacteria carry out nitrite oxidation. Both steps of nitrification are usually aerobic, with O2 as the terminal electron acceptor. An exception is the b-proteobacterium Nitrosomonas eutropha, which oxidizes ammonium anaerobically to nitrite and nitric oxide (NO) using nitrogen dioxide (NO2) as an acceptor in a denitrification-related reaction.

The production of nitrate is important because it can be reduced and incorporated into microbial and plant cell biomass in
a process known as assimilatory nitrate reduction. Alternatively, some microorganisms use nitrate as a terminal electron acceptor during anaerobic respiration. When respired, the nitrogen is not incorporated into cellular material, so this is called dissimilatory nitrate reduction. A variety of microbes, including Geobacter metallireducens and Desulfovibrio spp., are capable of dissimilatory nitrate reduction. When nitrate is fully reduced to dinitrogen gas (N2), nitrogen is removed from the ecosystem and returned to the atmosphere through a series of reactions collectively known as denitrification. This dissimilatory process is performed by a variety of heterotrophic bacteria, such as Pseudomonas denitrificans. The major products of dissimilatory nitrate reduction include nitrogen gas (N2) and nitrous oxide (N2O), although nitrite (NO22) also can accumulate (see figure 11.18). N2O, an important greenhouse gas, is also produced during ammonia oxidation to nitrite; that is, the first step of nitrification. This is particularly true of marine ammonia oxidizing archaea.

The anammox reaction (anoxic ammonium oxidation) is an anaerobic reaction performed by chemolithotrophs in the phylum Planctomycetes. Here ammonium ion (NH41) serves as the electron donor and nitrite (NO22) as the terminal electron acceptor; it is reduced to nitrogen gas (N2) . In effect, the anammox reaction is a shortcut to N2, proceeding directly from ammonium and nitrite, without having to cycle first through nitrate. The discovery that planctomycete bacteria oxidize considerable amounts of NH41 to N2, thereby removing ammonia from the environment, has sparked keen interest in the
wastewater management field, where high levels of ammonia are undesirable.

Nitrogen fixation is catalyzed by an enzyme complex called nitrogenase. Nitrogenase consists of two proteins, dinitrogenase and dinitrogenase reductase. Both proteins contain iron, and dinitrogenase contains molybdenum as well. The iron and molybdenum in dinitrogenase are part of the enzyme cofactor called the iron–molybdenum cofactor (FeMo-co), and reduction of N2 occurs at this site. The composition of FeMo-co is MoFe7S8•homocitrate (Figure 14.21). Two “alternative” nitrogenases are known that lack molybdenum. These contain either vanadium (V) plus iron or iron-only in their cofactors and are made by certain nitrogenfixing bacteria when molybdenum is limiting in their environment.

Owing to the stability of the triple bond in N2, its activation and reduction is very energy demanding. Six electrons are needed to reduce N2 to NH3, and the successive reduction steps occur directly on nitrogenase with no free intermediates accumulating. Although only six electrons are necessary to reduce N2 to two NH3, eight electrons are actually consumed in the process, two electrons being lost as H2 for each mole of N2 reduced. For unknown reasons, H2 evolution is an obligatory step in nitrogen fixation and occurs in the first round of the nitrogenase reduction cycle. Following this, N2 is reduced in successive steps, and ammonia is the released product.

The sequence of electron transfer in nitrogenase is as follows: electron donor S dinitrogenase reductase S dinitrogenase S
N2. The electrons for N2 reduction are transferred to dinitrogenase reductase from the low-potential iron–sulfur proteins
ferredoxin or flavodoxin. In addition to electrons, ATP is required for nitrogen fixation. ATP binds to dinitrogenase reductase, and, following its hydrolysis to ADP, lowers the reduction potential of the protein. This allows dinitrogenase reductase to interact with and reduce dinitrogenase. Electrons are transferred from dinitrogenase reductase to dinitrogenase one at a time, and each cycle of reduction requires two ATP. Thus a total of 16 ATP are required for the reduction of N2 to 2NH3. 